When assisting someone who is suffering from a first aid emergency, a first aider may assist the
victim if they have first identified themselves, asked for and received the victim’s permission for
treatment, or the victim is unconscious. A first aider may also assist a child if no parents or
guardians are present; however, if there is a parent or guardian present, then permission must
be obtained.
Once a first aider has initiated first aid treatment, they are not to abandon the victim.
Accordingly, they must remain with the victim and may only stop treatment if medical
assistance is administered by another trained professional. A first aider may be justified in

ceasing treatment if there is a threat to that first aider’s life or they are too exhausted to
continue and there are no other alternative sources of help available.
When responding to an unconscious victim, regardless of age, there are several steps that must
be taken. First, the first aider must assess the area for hazards that could harm the first aider or
the victim. Secondly, the first aider must assess the victim’s level of consciousness. Third, if the
victim is unresponsive, the first aider should activate EMS. Fourth, the first aider should open
the victim’s airway before starting CPR.
To treat a wound that is bleeding the first aider should apply a clean sterile dressing to the
wound and apply pressure to that area. First aiders are no longer required to elevate the
affected area unless the wound is an arterial bleed. If the blood soaks through the dressing
apply additional dressing over the original dressing and continue to apply pressure. Do not
remove the original dressing as this may remove any clotting that has formed.
A secondary assessment is initiated once the primary first aid emergency has been treated. It is
a systematic search with three steps. First, the first aider will assess the victim’s vital signs and
record it in an effective manner. Next, the first aider will perform a head-to-toe examination to
look for other injuries. Finally, the first aider will attempt to obtain and record relevant medical
history of the victim.
Hypothermia is a condition that causes one’s body to lose heat faster than it can produce. The
primary signs and symptoms include, shivering, loss of muscle coordination, confusion, and
disorientation.
